---
layout: article
title: A note on the place of quality and unit testing today in the industry
date: 03.05.2013
author: Fabio Salvalai
published: false
---
Quality softwares are a good thing.
Everybody wants a well-made, bug-free, efficient, responsive and stable software. As a software manufacturer, selling high-quality is definitely the biggest argument you can have against your competitors. Customers will probably choose stable software with fewer features that work well, rather than an unstable homologue, even though it's packed with features, especially if it comes with the promise of bringing the missing bits down the road. People love buying quality products; People love selling quality products. Everything seems so simple, we might wonder why there are so many applications in the industry which suffer from poor quality, high maintenance costs, countless man-hours spent in bug-fixing and dedicated 24/7 customer-services.

## The shocking truth behind software quality
Well, in order to have them, people have to write them. It certainly does seem obvious when put that way, but many, many players in the industry, including big names, believe they can skim on the time they spend on the quality of their software. Well, of course it is a non-neglectable price to pay, but - hey - you get what you pay for.

## When the price is too high
As with anything in life, there is more than one way to skin a cat. If you want to buy a hard disk, you might find a reseller which will sell it to you for what you consider as being an unreasonnably high price tag. Is this good enough a reason to forget about storing your holidays pictures and have those wonderful memories gone forever? If you find this price to be excessive, you'll probably resort to buying a smaller hard disk at the same reseller. You might be safe for this year, but next time when you're frantically point-and-shooting your Nikon like a trigger-happy Rambo, you will have to buy a new disk, and since you can have only so many hard disks connected at the same time, you will need to buy a much bigger one so you can also transfer your older pictures which you thought would be safe on your small hard disk.
In software engineering, this overhead of wasted disk-space which you can't use anymore is called "Technical Debt". You wanted to skim on quality, you cut corners, and now you'll have to pay the ransom of the rush you were in when you made that call.

###Tech Debt is a necessary evil.
Don't misunderstand me. Technical Debt is absolutely necessary. You just can't build a decent piece of software without introducing a fair amount of those. The hard part is keeping the fair amount fair. A harder part is making the call to pay-off this tech debt, in order to avoid having to pay too much interest on it. If you contract too much debt, soon enough you will not have the backbone to cope with the interests and you will choke under the weight of the workarounds which you will need to put in place in order to continue to live with the trade-off you once agreed to make. Most often, you will even think as those trade-offs as temporary. It's fine, really. Just keep it temporary. If you don't, you will soon realize that you will have to introduce un-clean hacks, resulting themselves into dirtier ones, and so begins the downward spiral.

###try to get a better deal.
Most companies who will try to skim on the quality will do so because the price "is too high". Like I said before, if you go to your usual reseller and the hard disk you need is out of your budget, you can just change your mind and not buy any. That, we've established, is out of the question, because you don't want to be taking pictures just to throw them away, just like that. You can also buy a smaller than the one you need. That, we've established as being already more reasonable, but will eventually cost you way more than what should. The last, and usually most overlooked option is just to walk out of your usual reseller, and try to find a better deal somewhere else !
It seems silly at first, but the alternatives in terms of practices and tooling regarding software quality aren't so seldom. Find the practices that suit your team the most, identify the pitfalls and pain points in your developement processes, and rub those sore areas with the right ointment: you might find you can get what you need by just investing a bit of time and/or money in a proper infrastructure, which will save you big bucks on the mid-to-long run!